---
layout: post
title:  "My exam in 2006"
categories: [ problem, exam ]
image: assets/images/flowerbed.jpg
imagecred: Background photo created by pvproductions - www.freepik.com
imagecredlink: https://www.freepik.com/photos/background
---
I have always been pretty curious about redoing my exam, after more than 10 years, and see how long it would take me to solve the first problem (the one I actually chose back then). The exam was the [ordinary session of school year 2005/2006, PNI][exam-pdf].

### Problem
The problem was quite straightforward: a wire of length $\lambda \in \mathbb{R}$ is used to define the perimiter of a rectangular flowerbed. What is the maximum area of the flowerbed one can delimit?

### Solution
This is a maximization problem. So we need a function. Let's start writing down the flowerbed's surface:

$$
S = l_1 \cdot l_2
$$

Where $l_1 \in \mathbb{R}$ is the length of short side of the rectangle, and $l_2 \in \mathbb{R}$ the length of the long one. The other thing we need is, of course, the perimeter which is basically $\lambda$ itself as the problem states:

$$
\lambda = 2(l_1 + l_2)
$$

We need to think of $\lambda$ as a **fixed quantity**: that is, a value given in advance as a parameter. From the last equation, let's isolate one of the two lengths (I take $l_1$, but it works the same with $l_2$):

$$
2l_1 = \lambda - 2l_2 \implies l_1 = \frac{\lambda}{2} - l_2
$$

Now we substitute $l_1$ inside the equation for the surface:

$$
S(l_2) = \left( \frac{\lambda}{2} - l_2 \right) \cdot l_2
$$

Now we have the surface expressed as a function of one of the side's length. As we change the value of $l_2$, we get a different area. Which value of $l_2$ gives us the maximum area? As usual, let's simply compute the derivative of $S$ by $l_2$:

$$
\frac{dS}{dl_2} = S^\prime(l_2) = \frac{\lambda}{2} - 2l_2
$$

Let's find out the stationary points:

$$
S^\prime(l_2) = 0 \implies \frac{\lambda}{2} - 2l_2 = 0 \implies l^\ast_2 = \frac{\lambda}{4}
$$

We can see that around $l^\ast_2$, $S^\prime(l_2)$ changes sign from positive to negative, which means that around that point $S(l_2)$ changes monotonicity from increasing to decreasing: $l^\ast_2$ is a point of maximum.

We are almost done, since $l^\ast_2$ is the value which gets us the maximum area, let's calculate the maximum area:

$$
S^\ast = S \left( l^\ast_2 \right) = \frac{\lambda^2}{16}
$$

And that's it. Today it took me 15 minutes or so (maybe less). Back then, it took me almost 2 hours eheh.

[exam-pdf]: https://www.istruzione.it/esame_di_stato/Secondo_Ciclo/tracce_prove_scritte/2006/Y557.pdf
